Prefix migration guide (#4844)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/operational-guides/update-guide/860-to-870.md

It is required that the: operate, tasklist and new prefix are defined.

:::note
It is recommended that you first back up the Elasticsearch, and test the `migrate.sh` script in a test environment first
to ensure there are no unexpected issues.
:::

```shell
Usage: ./migrate.sh [options]

Options:
  --operate <value>     Prefix defined for operate
  --tasklist <value>    Prefix defined for tasklist
  --prefix <value>      New prefix for harmonised indices
  -h, --help            Display this help message.
```

If you would like to run the migration on your own, refer to the `Migrating to harmonised indices` and `Migrating historic indices`
sections.

### Update to 8.7

With the Elasticsearch migration finished, There are mandatory configuration changes to be made prior to updating to 8.7.

:::note
Without these configuration changes the update to 8.7 will fail.
:::

Given a new desired prefix of `some-prefix`

- The configured `CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-prefix`.
- The configured `CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-prefix`.

> - The prefix for the [Camunda exporter](/self-managed/zeebe-deployment/exporters/camunda-exporter.md) should be configured using `ZEEBE_BROKER_EXPORTERS_CAMUNDA_ARGS_INDEX_PREFIX` to `some-prefix`.

Reviewer: Are these changes part of 8.7 or 8.8?

Author: The migration application should be part 8.7

Reviewer 2: ❌ No 8.8

Author: yep my bad it got delayed, will have to change documentation to reflect this

custom prefixes defined and that you are migrated to another prefix.
:::

### Make the Elasticsearch instance reachable

The migration relies on communicating directly with Elasticsearch.

The below example relies on a kubernetes environment but any approach works as long as the Elasticsearch instance is reachable
on `http://localhost:9200`.

- **Kubernetes**: Port-forward your Elasticsearch instance to ensure it is reachable. In the following example, `camunda-platform` can be replaced by the service name:

  ```shell
  kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-platform-elasticsearch 9200:9200
  ```

### Create harmonized indices

To begin creating the harmonized indices for migration, first pull the following Docker image:

```shell
docker pull camunda/zeebe:SNAPSHOT
```

Run the command below, replacing `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_PREFIX` value with your desired prefix:

```shell
docker run --rm -it --env CAMUNDA_DATABASE_URL="host.docker.internal:9200" --env CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX=<prefix> --entrypoint /usr/local/zeebe/bin/schema camunda/zeebe:SNAPSHOT
```

### Migrating indices

The migration of the indices assumes that elasticsearch is reachable on
localhost:9200.

> Execute the `.migrate.sh` bash script which has dependencies on `jq` and `curl`.
> It is required that the: operate, tasklist and new prefix are defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We better UX we provide a bash script: `.migrate.sh` to run the migration. The bash script which has dependencies on `jq` and `curl`.
It is required that the: operate, tasklist and new prefix are defined.

If you would like to run the migration on your own, please have a look at the script, what steps are necessary.
```

Reviewer 2: Actually, can you bring back the description from before? I would like to have it still, the bash is just a good add-on to make it easier, but I think it would be useful to understand what is happening and some might want to ran it manually.

Reviewer 2: We might want to also add that they should make sure to backup their data before plus testing the script first in dev environment to be safe.

- `ASSIGN`
- `ASSIGNING`
- `ASSIGNED`

## Prefix migration

> If a custom prefix has been defined for Operate and Tasklist (for example, using `camunda.operate.elasticsearch.indexPrefix`), then data must be migrated manually to the new indices.

Reviewer 3: I added an example value here; can you ensure it is correct?

> If a custom prefix has been defined for Operate and Tasklist (for example, using `camunda.operate.elasticsearch.indexPrefix`), then data must be migrated manually to the new indices.

Reviewer 2: ❗  We should state somehow maybe via a important note or something that it is a prerequisite before doing the actual update.

Author: will do

### Make the Elasticsearch instance reachable

The migration relies on communicating directly with Elasticsearch. The Elasticsearch instance must be reachable on `http://localhost:9200`.

> - **Kubernetes**: Port-forward your Elasticsearch instance to ensure it is reachable. In the following example, `camunda-platform` can be replaced by the release name:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Kubernetes**: Port-forward your Elasticsearch instance to ensure it is reachable. In the following example, `camunda-platform` can be replaced by the service name:
```

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't reference release name here, as it might be that the customer/user has deployed ES separate

> - **Kubernetes**: Port-forward your Elasticsearch instance to ensure it is reachable. In the following example, `camunda-platform` can be replaced by the release name:

Reviewer 2: We can note that our example relies on a kubernetes environment but works also with others.

  ```shell
  kubectl port-forward svc/camunda-platform-elasticsearch 9200:9200
  ```

### Create harmonized indices

> To begin creating the harmonized indices for migration, first pull the following Docker image:

Reviewer 3: Added additional description to these steps, though I understand this process may change entirely to a script, etc.

Author: The additional description makes sense

```shell
docker pull camunda/zeebe:SNAPSHOT
```

Run the command below, replacing `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_PREFIX` value with your desired prefix:

```shell
docker run --rm -it --env CAMUNDA_DATABASE_URL="host.docker.internal:9200" --env CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX=<prefix> --entrypoint /usr/local/zeebe/bin/schema camunda/zeebe:SNAPSHOT

> ```

Reviewer 2: ❓ Why is this necessary?

Reviewer 2: Yeah I just later realized that we need to do this, because of the reindex. Could we mention this?

### Migrate to harmonized indices

Migrating to the harmonized indices will be done through reindexing.

> 1. In Postman, import the collection `Prefix migration.postman_collection.json`.

Reviewer 3: Where will we be hosting this collection?

Author: I would assume in the camunda repo somewhere, but this part is subject to the most change, likely the postman collection will be removed and replaced by a script of some sort.

Reviewer 4: @EuroLew I oversee Postman, so just let me know if you need access or want me to make any changes for you 😄

2. In the Postman client, set the global variables which template the requests, where `oldOperatePrefix` and `oldTasklistPrefix` are the prefixes which were previously configured, and `prefix` is the new prefix for your harmonized indices.
3. Execute all requests in the collection.

### Migrate archived indices

For each archived index, you must:

- Put the index in read only mode.

> - Clone the index with the changed name.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be beneficial to explain a bit more why we chose this approach, instead of reindexing again. 

For example because we would need to pre create the indices, read only because we don't want to have any write during cloning etc.

Reviewer 2: We should also put a warning here that this will increase the disc usage by a lot (I mean it will double it)

For example, to migrate `operate-prefix-job-8.6.0_2025-01-08`, the index must be marked as read online as in the following example:

```shell
curl -X PUT "http://localhost:9200/operate-prefix-job-8.6.0_2025-01-08/_settings" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
  "settings": {
    "index.blocks.write": "true"
  }
}'
```

The archived index must then be cloned with an updated prefix:

```shell
curl -X POST "http://localhost:9200/operate-prefix-job-8.6.0_2025-01-08/_clone/new-prefix-job-8.6.0_2025-01-08" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
  "settings": {
    "index.blocks.write": false,
    "number_of_replicas": 0
  },
  "aliases": {
    "new-prefix-job-8.6.0_alias": {}
  }
}'

> ```

Reviewer 2: I feel I can write a script for such.

```sh
#!/bin/bash

set -euox pipefail

prefix=$1
newPrefix=$2

indices=$(curl "http://localhost:9600/$prefix*" | jq --raw-output "keys[]" | grep -E "$prefix.+_[0-9]+")

echo "Found $indices containing historic data."
echo "Cloning indices to new prefix"

for index in $indices; do

  echo "Set $index read-only"
  curl -X PUT "http://localhost:9200/$index/_settings" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
    "settings": {
       "index.blocks.write": "true"
    }
  }'

  # Clone index
  newIndexName=$(echo "${index/$prefix/$newPrefix}")

  echo "Clone $index to $newIndexName"
  newAliasName=$(echo "${index%_*}_alias")

  curl -X POST "http://localhost:9200/$index/_clone/$newIndexName" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{
    "settings": {
      "index.blocks.write": false,
      "number_of_replicas": 0
    },
    "aliases": {
      "$newAliasName": {}
    }
  }'

done

echo "Migration to new custom prefix $newPrefix done"
```

@EuroLew can you validate whether this works for you?

Author: thanks for the help it worked :)

As stated in the [clone command description](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/indices-clone-index.html), the number of replicas is not copied over, and must be set explicitly. If not set, it may default to an incorrect value.

### Update to 8.7

With the Elasticsearch migration finished, ensure the following prior to updating to 8.7:

- The prefixes configured for Operate and Tasklist are changed to reflect the new prefix for the harmonized index. If this configuration is not changed, then Operate and Tasklist will continue to refer to the pre-migration indices which will not reflect any new changes.

  For example, given a new prefix of `some-prefix`:

  - The configured `CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-prefix`.
  - The configured `CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-prefix`.

>   - The prefix for the [Camunda exporter](/self-managed/zeebe-deployment/exporters/camunda-exporter.md) should be configured using `ZEEBE_BROKER_EXPORTERS_CAMUNDA_ARGS_INDEX_PREFIX` to `some-prefix`.

Reviewer 2: I guess we should be more explicit that they need to set these configs

custom prefixes defined and that you are migrated to another prefix.
:::

### Migrating indices

:::warning
Disk usage will massively increase while the migration is ongoing.
Make sure you have at least double of disk space free.
:::

:::note
It is recommended that you first back up the Elasticsearch, and test the `migrate` script in a test environment first
to ensure there are no unexpected issues.
:::

1. Stop the 8.6 cluster while keeping Elasticsearch up
2. In the `camunda/bin` directory there is a `prefix-migration` script that will execute the prefix migration,
   pass the desired prefix using the `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX` environment variable.

```shell

> CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX=some-prefix ./prefix-migration

Reviewer 2: ❓ @EuroLew dont we need also the previous index prefixes?

Author: The script uses `OperateProperties` from the old cluster to retrieve the previous index prefixes, as a result looking at my instructions there's an error instead of stopping the 8.7 cluster it should pause exporting, run migration, then bring the cluster down

Author: Or instead of changing instructions to pause exporting we keep it as is
- stop old cluster
- run migration
- start new cluster

and force the user to provide the old prefixes during the migration, imo the pause exporting approach is more user friendly
